








And although it is now generally conceded that selves are evanescent looping recursions within a fractal hypertext of space, it may be easily forgotten that this was not always the case. (theory by Douglas Hofstdater, calls self a strange loop) He often said that a self is rather like a smile. A smile isn’t a thing, it’s not composed of stuff, it is a pattern. Where is your smile when it is not on your face? It’s a potential. Furthermore a smile can exist in different media on different substrates. So if someone asks Your smile yesterday and your smile today, which one is the real smile. I’d reply neither. Both are genuine, my smile comes in multiple instances. The recursive instances that we call the self are reflexive, fractal patterns that include an image of themselves. Strange loops occur when, traversing any hierarchical system, one eventually discovers that one is back at the beginning again. 367


Shows
Open Systems: Rethinking Art c. 1970 (Tate, 2005)
Systems Art (Whitechapel, 2007)
Imaging by Numbers (Block, 2007)
Software (1970)
Index 01 (1972)
New tendencies (1961-1973)
Nuremberg Biennale 1971
A Journey that Wasn’t (Pierre Huyghe, 2005)

Books
Telematic Embrace (Roy Ascott)
Art, Time, Technology (Charlie Gere)
Systems of Art (Francis Halsalls)
Chronophobia (Pamela Lee)
Art and Electronic Media (Edward Shanken)
Art as Inquiry: Toward New COllaborations between art, science, and technology (Marga Bijvoet)
Beyond Modern Sculpture (Jack Burnham)
Rethinking a System’s Aesthetic (Mitchell Whitelaw)
Art as Social System (Niklas Luhmann)
Fotograf (Wojciech Bruszewski)



Names
Billy Kluver
Gyorgy Kepes
Nam June Paik
Paul Ryan
Bill VIola
Woody and Steina Vasulka
Haacke
Smithson
Oppenheim
Kosuth
Ted Nelson
Frieder Nake
Waldemar Cordeiro
Getullio Alviani
Gianni Colombo
Leonardo Mosso
Gruppo T
Nees
A Michael Noll
Zdenek Sykora
Richard Winiarski
Michael Argov
Ruth Zorfati
Amichai Shavit
Luis Fernando Benedit
Jan Slothouber
William Graatsma
Stanislaw Drozdz
Michal Bieganowski
Jerzy Baranowski
Wojciech Bruszewski
Max Dean- The robotic Chair
Edward Ihnatowicz
Phil Morton and Jane Veeder
Eric S. Raymond (founded Open source initiative)
Jason Wee
Issei Yoshida





Center for Advanced Visual Studies



The science of managing our digital stuff
Bergman, Ofer and Steve Whittaker



 to decide what to keep, we have to determine the probable future value of an information item. This is a general psychological problem. A great deal of psychological research shows that people are bad at making many types of decisions that involve their future. Such protection requires people to reason about hypothetical situations, the task at which people are notoriously poor. Peoples predictions are also subject to various types of bias. For example, they expect the future to be very much like the present, and their predictions are unduly influenced by recent or easily recalled events. People are also loss averse, so thinking about information in a context in which it might be deleted leads them to overvalue it. 35

People experience problems with information overload, leading them to only partially process incoming information. They engage in deferred evaluation of what to keep causing them to acquire large amounts of data that leader turned out to be extraneous. 37

Uniqueness was not the sole criterion for deciding to keep data. To our surprise, only 49% of people’s original archive was unique. Our study suggested four main reasons: availability, reminding, lack of trust in external stores, and sentiment. 40
 Importance is user dependent and thus subjective: an information item can be very important to one person and completely unimportant to another. The same item might also be important and relevant to a user today but unimportant (irrelevant) to him or her next month. One measure of relevance can be derived from users interaction with their information: recently used information items are generally judged as more relevant than those that have not been used for a long time. 185

Dear Data
Giorgia Lupi and Stefanie Posavec

Maria Popova (forward)
My experience is what I agreed to attend to William James wrote at the dawn of modern psychology. Our experience is shaped as much by what we agreed to take in as it is by what we refuse what we choose to leave out and both are only partly conscious choices. Vii

By noticing our behavior, we were influencing our behavior. We believe data collected from life can be a snapshot of the world in the same way that a picture catch a small moments in time. Data can describe the hidden patterns found in every aspect of our lives, from our digital existence to the natural world around us. Every plant, every person, every interaction we take part in can be mapped, counted, and measured, and these measurements are what we call data. And once you realize the data can be gathered from every single being and thing on the planet, and you know how to find these invisible numbers, you begin to see these numbers everywhere, in everything. Besides finding data in the world around us, we are creating data just by living: our purchases, our movements through the city, explorations across the Internet, all contribute to the data trail we leave in our wake as we move through life. This data is being collected, counted, and computed both on a massive scale by companies and institutions seeking insights and answers and on a smaller scale by individual seeking to understand more about themselves, using data to quantify the self and become more efficient optimized humans. Because of this we are said to be living in the age of big data, where algorithms and computation are seen as the new keys to universal questions, and where a myriad of applications can detect, aggregate, and visualize our data for us to help us become these efficient super humans.  We argue we can use data to become more humane and to connect with ourselves and others at a deeper level. X

Everyone secretly stores data even if they don’t admit to it 58-59

Counting something means it matters 134

Moments you don’t notice are as telling as the ones you do 142


C.S. Lewis The Problem of Pain

All men alike stand condemned, not by alien codes of ethics, but by their own, and all men therefore a conscious of guilt. 11

It is not a system into which we have to fit the awkward fact of pain: it is itself one of the awkward facts which have to be fit it into any system we make. In a sense, it creates, rather than solves, the problem of pain, for pain would be no problem unless, side-by-side with our daily experience of this painful world, we had received what we think a good assurance that ultimate reality is righteous and loving. 14

 His omnipotence means power to do all that is intrinsically possible, not to do the intrinsically impossible. You may attribute miracles to him, but not nonsense. This is no limit to his power. If you choose to say ‘God can give the creature free well and at the same time withhold free will from it’, you have not succeeded in saying anything about God: meaningless combinations of words do not suddenly acquire meaning simply because we prefix to them the two other words God can’t. It remains true that all things are possible with God: the intrinsic and possibilities are not things but nonities. It is no more possible for God than for the weakest of his creatures to carry out both of two mutually exclusive alternatives; not because his power meets an obstacle, but because nonsense remains nonsense even when we talk about God. 18

We learn from the doctrine of the Blessed Trinity that something analogous to society exists within the divine being from all eternity— that God is love, not merely in the sense of being the platonic form of love, but because, within him, the concrete but reciprocities of love exist before all worlds and are thence derived to the creatures. 20

The minimum condition of self consciousness and freedom then would be that the creature should apprehend God and, therefore, itself as distinct from God. It is possible that such creatures exist, aware of God and themselves, but if no fellow creatures. If so, their freedom is simply that of making a single naked choice of loving God more than the self or the self more than God. But a life so reduced to essentials is not imaginable to us. 20

Matter which keeps souls apart, also brings them together. It enables each of us to have an outside as well as an inside, so that what are acts of will and thought for you are noises and glances for me; you are enabled not only to be but to appear: and hence I have the pleasure of making your acquaintance. 22

Whatever human freedom means, divine freedom cannot mean inner indeterminacy between alternatives and choice of one of them. Perfect goodness can never debate about the end to be attained, and perfect wisdom cannot debate about the means most suited to achieve it. 26

Beyond all doubt, his idea of goodness differs from ours; but you need have no fear that, as you approach it, you will be asked simply to reverse your moral standards. When the relevant difference between the divine ethics and your own appears to you, you will not, in fact, be in any doubt that the change demanded of you is in the direction you already called better. The divine goodness differs from ours, but it is not sheerly different: it differs from ours not as white from black but as a perfect circle from a child’s first attempt to draw a wheel. But when the child has learned to draw, it will know that the circle it then makes is what it was trying to make from the very beginning. 30

This doctrine is presupposed in Scripture. Christ calls men to repeat—a call which would be meaningless if God standards were sheerly different from that which they already know and field to practice. He appeals to our existing moral judgment. God in the Old Testament expostulates with men on the basis of their own conceptions of gratitude, Fidelity, and Fairplay: he puya himself, as it were, at the bar before his own creatures. 30-31

Love may, indeed, love the beloved when her beauty is lost: but not because it is lost. Love may forgive all infirmities and love still in spite of them: but love cannot cease to will their removal. 39

We were made not primarily that we may love God but that God may love us, that we may become objects in which the divine love may rest well pleased. To ask that God‘s love should be content with us as we are is to ask that God should cease to be God: because he is what he is, his love must, in the nature of things, be impeded and repelled by certain strains in our present character, because he already loves us he must labor to make us loveable. 40-41

Love may cause pain to its object, but only on the supposition that that object needs alteration to become fully lovable. 48

Christianity now has to preach the diagnosis— in itself very bad news— before it can win a hearing for the cure. 48

The real trouble is that kindness is a quality fairly easy to attribute to ourselves on quite inadequate grounds. Everyone feels benevolent if nothing happens to be annoying him at the moment. Thus a man easily comes to console himself for all his other vices by a conviction that his heart’s in the right place and he wouldn’t hurt a fly, so in fact he’s never made the slightest sacrifice for a fellow creature. We think we are kind and we are only happy: it is not so easy, on the same grounds, to imagine oneself temperate, chaste, or humble. 49

but unless Christianity is wholly false, the perception of ourselves which we have in moments of change must be the only true one. 50

In trying to extirpate shame we have broken down one of the ramparts of the human spirit. 50

Until we really feel this assumption of his to be true, that we are part of the world he came to save, we are not part of the audience to whom his words are addressed. We lack the first condition for understanding what he’s talking about. And when men attempt to be Christians without this preliminary consciousness of sin, the result is almost bound to be a certain resentment against God as to one always inexplicably angry. 50-51

Every man, not very holy or very arrogant, Hass to live up to the outward appearance of other men. 53
We have never told the whole truth we may confess ugly facts— the meanest cowardice or the shabbiest and most prosaic impurity— but the tone is false. 53

But mere time does nothing either to the fact or to the guilt of a sin. The guilt is washed out not by time but by repentance and the blood of Christ: if we have repented these really sins we should remember the price of our forgiveness and be humble. 54-55

It may be that salvation consists not in the canceling of these eternal moments but in the perfected humanity that bears the shame forever, rejoicing in the occasion which it furnished to God‘s compassion and glad but it should be common knowledge to the universe. 55

God may be more than moral goodness: he is not less. 59

Hence the older type of nurse or parent was quite right in thinking that the first step in education is to break the child’s will. 89

Our father refreshes us on the journey with some pleasant inns but will not encourage us to mistake them for home. 116

But forgiveness needs to be accepted as well as offered if it was to be complete: and a man who admits no guilt can accept no forgiveness. 124

The taste for the other, that is, the very capacity for enjoying good. 125

To enter heaven is to become more human than you ever succeeded in being on earth; to enter hell, is to be banished from humanity. 127-128

Surely, that each of the redeemed shall forever know and praise one aspect of the divine beauty better than any other creature can. 154


Enfoldment and Infinity, Laura Marks

What we see and hear is often the end result of processes of information: databases and the algorithms that make them act.  What we perceive is more than ever before generated by an underlying code.  This quality of digital media is an aspect of information culture in general, computer-based or not.  Since Hegel, a definition of art has been the sensible presentation of the idea: art is supposed to make the invisible visible.  What is different now is a new level of invisibility—though not immateriality: information.  So many perceptible things consist of matter that is processed by information.  In this way contemporary visual culture is really information culture, for though we in the postindustrial world are using our eyes more than ever before, it is not to look at pictures but to read information.  Gilles Deleuze predicted this shift from visual to information culture in a brief description of electronic and ‘numerical” images: “The screen itself, even if it keeps a vertical position by convention, no longer seems to refer to the human posture, like a window or painting, but rather constitutes a table of information, an opaque surface on which are inscribed ‘data’, information replacing nature, and the brain-city, the third eye, replacing the eyes of nature.” 2-3


Art is aniconic when the image shows us that what we do not see is more significant than what we do.  The image that we perceive refers to its underlying cause.  These are not artworks of the image, but of enfolding and unfolding.  In the aesthetics of enfolding and unfolding, three levels—image, information, and the infinite—enfold each other and unfold from each other.  I borrow the term enfoldment from quantum physics, where it was expressed in the writings of David Bohm, who observed the behavior of subatomic particles that are far apart but act as though they “know” what each other is doing. 5

My intervention in Deleuze’s theory of signs is to insert another image plane between image and the infinite: information—a plane through which the semiotic process passes before images can arise.  This step draws attention to the nonperceptual forces that intervene in the process of semiosis.  All of these levels are real, in Deleuze’s sense that the real encompasses the virtual and the actual.  The actual is what exists.  The virtual is the field of preconditions for the actual.  In the relationship I propose, image is an interface to information, and information is an interface to the infinite.  The interface may make the user aware to some degree or other of the relationship between the code and the world, or it may completely obscure it.  Programming languages use abstraction and translation to mediate between human user and machine code. 6-7

As I seek to establish a parallel between the art of Islam and the systems-based art of computers, it remains clear that both fascinate because they invite the impossible task of contemplating infinity—a universe innumerable beyond imagining.  The infinity of information technology is quantitative. At best it is a version of the mathematical sublime, in Kant’s term: an infinite that is reached through computation.

A belief in the unity and interconnectedness of all experience animated early cybernetic theory.  This faith quickly became perverted into an instrumental and elitist use of networking, which serves what Deleuze calls the “societies of control”.  INformation culture produces not the schizo, the creative, deterritorialized subject, but the “dividual”, a compliant, desubjectified person who acquiesces to being quantified and learn new skills to meet market demands.  The media of our information age simulate the infinite but tend to reiterate and reinforce certain paths with a terrible, cliched, controlling sameness.  This is the oft-noted similarity of digital archives to Jorge Luis Borges’ map that is larger than the territory it describes: the same item is indexed from many different sites until the number of indexes far exceeds the number of things they index.  Information media often simulate as well the subjective path through which the infinite is discovered, in vast networks and archives through which the user is led to believe she travels at will. 19

A term from mathematics, logical depth signifies the number of calculations that have been discarded in order to come up with an equation or algorithm.  Computer scientist Charles Bennett defines logical depth as the amount of calculating time embedded in a message: “The value of a message is the amount of mathematical or other work plausibly done by its originator, which its receiver is saved from having to repeat.”  In other words, local depth is the amount of (useful) labor enfolded in a message. 23

Good computer art, by the classical criterion I am proposing here, similarly exploits the complexity of enfolding-unfolding relations.  It does not immediately collapse the perceptible image to its numerical basis in database and algorithm, nor does it remain statically at the level of image.  Rather, it invites the perceiver to marvel at the richness with which the perceptible image unfolds from the numerical base. 42

John Simon’s Unfolding Object

If an algorithm is a statement of instructions that, when carried out, will bring about a new state or new information, then many art forms can be said to be algorithmic.  What is most interesting about artworks that reveal and revel in their algorithmic construction is that they indicate a certain way the image unfolds from the imperceptible: that relationships can be known rationally. 153

Contemporary information-based artwork that demonstrates the clarity of its algorithms, relating images to the code that produced them in pleasing complex ways, is a clear parallel to the “mind-cleansing” geometrical artwork associated with Sunni Islam.  Similarly, the quality of elegance in an equation consists in the vast amount of calculation that is invisible, yet implicit, in the final formulation.  Elegance is an index of logical depth; a mathematician who knows the codes can appreciate the skill with which they are concealed. 167

Apartment by Marek Walczak and Martin Wattenberg

In “On Totalitarian Interactivity” Lev Manovich recalls his Soviet upbringing to explain his suspicion of the promises of new media: For the West, interactivity is a perfect vehicle for the ideas of democracy and equality.  For the East, it is another form of manipulation, in which the artist uses advanced technology to impose his/her totalitarian will on the people… Western media artists usually take technology absolutely seriously and despair when it does not work.  Post-communist artists, on the other hand, recognize that the nature of technology is that it does not work, will always break down, will never work as it was supposed to. 174


From Fingers to Digits Margaret Boden and Ernest Edmonds

CA-art, in which the computer is used by human artist as an aid in the art-making process, raises no philosophical problems that do not also arise given the use of paintbrushes or chisels.  That is not true of CG-art, in which a computer program is left to run by itself, with minimal or zero interference from a human being.  Here, the relative autonomy of the computer threatens to usurp the role of the human artist. 5

A further development is based on a systems view, in which the audience and the artwork are seen as collections of systems that exchange information.  Stroud Cornock and Edmonds presented the concept of seeing the artwork, the object itself, and members of the participating audience as interacting systems and suggested that the art system might be seen as the collection of all these things. 15

Step-by-step programming feels more directive than rule-based programming.  In the latter case, one might say that the artist leaves the computer to do its own thing without knowing just what it is that the computer will be doing.  The computer-art community usually regards it as important that the artwork is generated from a set of rules, or constraints, rather than from a step-by-step algorithm.  But this is more a matter of taste than anything else.  Even when programmers have written explicitly step-by-step code, they do not necessarily know the outcome.  Despite the difference between the feel of the two programming approaches, there is no distinction at the most fundamental level: in  all but the very simplest cases, both types of program are unpredictable by their programmer. 47

If the CG artist’s skill is invisible or mysterious, this does not rule out the possibility that the resulting artwork may interest, disturb, or even enthrall us.  It means that no one is completely prevented from appreciating CG art.  But it seems that this type of art cannot command our respect for its creativity, or even its competence, considered as a product of technical skill. 92

Collingwood’s view was that art has a hugely important practical effect.  Emotional self-knowledge, he said, is necessarily provided by good art and is constructed also by the audience who understands it.  And such self-knowledge is a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition for a healthy society.  131

Another implication—on which Collinwood insisted repeatedly— was that the “work of art” is not a physical object or a physical phenomenon.  Nor is it a public performance.  It is not even an abstract structure recorded in some formal notation.  Rather, the work of art is a mental entity: the (fully formed, identified, and subtly expressed) emotion in the artist’s mind—together with its psychological twin in the mind of the audience. 133

Aaron Marcus Evolving Gravity

Harold Cohen: The difference is that anyone can read the text of a poem; any musician can read the score.  But almost nobody can read the code and come out with the slightest idea of what would happen when you ran it.  Including me.  You know, you have to run it to find out what it’s going to do. 285

Manfred Mohr:  If you write a program, you have to order your thoughts, you have to really crystallize exactly what you want to do.  You suddenly see everything in a different light, and in a sense, my whole world turned upside down.  If I look nowadays at other people’s artworks with the knowledge I have acquired, I look at everything through a logical eye—my mind-set has changed.  It is the process of programming that change my mind, not the program itself. 295

Julie Freeman;  I think there’s some sort of dogma around code and how people write it and what they think about how it should be written.  But actually it’s a really personal, creative process.  I was sitting next to someone coding: we were both working on a Java thing, and we had to do the same piece of coursework.  And my solution was completely different to hers.  And we had really different techniques. 327



Making Sense by Simon Penny
Information is the representational construction. If there is no representation within the organism, then there is no information as such: the fact is the information does not exist independent of a context of organization that generates a cognitive domain, from which an observer community can describe certain elements as informational and symbolic. 25

Cybernetics may be understood more accurately as a science of systems and the role of feedback loops as a mode of organization. System, feedback,homeostasis, and other key terms of our gained their current meaning via cybernetic discourse. Cybernetics became a science of everything, in the sense that concerned abstract notions of systems, organization, and control. As such cybernetics was as applicable to thinking about the qualities of biological life as to machines, computational and other rights. Central to cybernetic thinking were questions of self organization and purposive behavior, the relationship of an entity to a changing environment, and adaptation. 41
A key insight of cybernetics was that systems could be self organizing in homeostatic by way of feedback mechanisms between themselves and their environment. In 1947, neurologist Ross Ashby coined the term self organizing system, and it was subsequently taken up by Norbert Weiner, among others of the notion of self organization in the early cybernetic literature involved adaptive, purposive, and even teleological systems. The concept has much in common with what today is called complexity theory, which refers to processes in which global patterns arise from multiple or iterated interactions in lower levels of a system. Canonical examples include the organization of social insects and emergence of mind from neural processes. 49

These fields of inquiry included self organizing systems, fractal mathematics, chaos theory, complexity theory, self organizing criticality, dynamical systems theory, nonlinear dynamics, and emergent order. 127

According to Ashby the theory of organization is partly coextensive with theory of functions of more than one variable. Ashby emphasizes the non-reducibility of such phenomena and the British analogy of the concept of organization as partly in the eye of the beholder. The properties of any particular time stream will depend on both the real thing and on the observer. It follows that a substantial part of the theory of organization will be concerned with properties that are not intrinsic to the thing but a relational between observer and thing. 130

Game of Life by John Conway RD texture buttons by Andrew Witkin and Michael Kass

Inherent also is a critique of representationalism come in the sense that the systems can perform intelligent work but do not contain representations that input data are compared with. Schemata are not explicit entities, but rather are implicit in our knowledge and are created by the very environment that they are trying to interpret in the conventional story, schemata are stored in memory. In our case, nothing stored corresponds very closely to a schema. 149

Algorithm is separate from data. In the physics of the virtual, the force of the algorithm works on the mass of data. In the genetic paradigm the evolved code establishes an intermediary step, but it is the design of the environment that generates the code that becomes the designed or meta-creative act. 155

 In our contemporary technoculture, the word information is ubiquitous. Phrases such as information economy a new disciplines such as informatics attest to this. The range of common contemporary uses of the term suggest that it is almost meaningless in a rigorous sense. Over the past half century, under the influence of Shannon's communication theory and the development of digital computing utilizing Boolean operations and von Neumann architecture, information has undergone ontological drift: it has become quantified in terms of bits, permanently separated from materiality. Information is an idea, a theoretical construct, that has become fundamental to computer science and fundamental cultures that engage with computing. The discipline of computer science is structured by a working definition that conflates information with computability. The idea of the separability of information from matter and the further assumption that information is inherently quantifiable implies objectivity in absolute external reality. We become naturalized to quantifying information. As a result, only that which can be represented as number and symbol is validated, and anything that is not amenable to digitization ceases to contain information. When all these axiomatic assumptions are internalized certain ways of thinking about intelligence, awareness, being, and selfhood become impossible. 167

As N. Katherine Hayles notes the point is not only that abstracting information from the material based is an imaginary act but also, and more fundamentally, that conceiving of information as it being separate from the medium instantiating it is a prior imaginary act that constructs a holistic phenomenon and information/materiality duality. 167

For Ingold, the terms art and technology occupy positions in the discipline of anthropology that recapitulate the Cartesian dualism, with technology occupying the position of body and art the position of mind. Thus technology refers to brute production in art to intentionality. 276

This extends aesthetics into unknown territory that I referred to as the aesthetics of behavior. Perspectives of the new neuroscience, cognitive science, and philosophies of mind inform analyses of cultural or aesthetic experience and in particular, cultural or aesthetic experience of computationally articulated cultural artifacts. 319

Almost all digital systems involve the designing of behavior through coding. Coding is writing a script for a process, similar to dramaturgy or choreography, except that it is enacted by machines. The script of a play or musical score involve symbolic representations of temporal processes, recipes to be followed but they almost never involve contingency. Structures of coding, such as if then statements, plan for contingency. Undergirding all these examples is a capacity for real time computation based on the different sensors. 365

Code is text that performs: it straddles the representational and performative idioms. 367

If the conventional binary of subject-object is a false construction in science and in art and if self and world are mutually co-constituting (umwelt) then we must approach the relation of person(s) with artworks as mutually influencing systems to be interpreted not in terms of active viewer and passive object, nor in terms of perception followed by an action, but rather as relational, structurally coupled, and agentic cognitive ecologies. 374

Infinite improvisation looks like chaos.  Improvisation is a structured opportunity for constrained surprise, a game of exploration and experimentation.  Any realm of improvisation implies a frame, a domain. 408

Code is a paradoxical object: It is a text and it is also a machine.  Programming languages, as systems for specification of behavior, occupy a novel position in terms of cultural artifacts, being texts that are both representational and performative. 417

Artworks are metacognitive.  THey provoke us to consider, for an instance, not just what we are seeing but also the experience of seeing itself and our assumptions about it. 440

Umwelt= the world as experienced by a particular organism Jakob von Uexküll



From Technological to Virtual Art (Popper)

Mohr’s artwork is always the result of a calculation. At the same time, however, it is not a mathematical art but rather an expression of his artistic experience. The rules he invents reflect his thinking and feelings. It is not necessarily the system or logic of his work he wants to present but the visual invention that results from it. 68

The hypermedia are the linking of separate media elements to one another in order to create a trail of personal associations. Randall Packer and Ken Jordan. 132

Andy Deck
Viewer is invited to participate in work, controversies about online decency and ownership of intellectual property were calling into question the future of online freedom 314




Data Browser 03: Curating Immateriality

A system can be understood as a collection of interrelated parts, both maintaining its internal order and also drawing the resources necessary for its survival and reproduction from the external environment. Organisation is key to this issue in what Ludwig van Bertalanffy’s systems theory refers to as a ‘complex of components in interaction’. 14

Jack Burnham saw this ‘superscientific culture’ as an indicator of a transition from an object-oriented to a systems-oriented culture where change emanates not from things but from the way things are done. By implication this also applied to art and the ways it conceptualised things.
Although closely related systems aesthetics differ from process aesthetics on important points. Whereas process aesthetics focused on action, effect, and production, system aesthetics focused on processing, circulation, and development. Materiality was conceptualised through open systems working with questions of internal organisation, real time, feedback, and contextual relations. In general soft(er) materials such as communication, data, and media spaces replaced the industrial and ‘heavy’ materials of process aesthetics. Materiality was conceived as contextual, as connected to, integrated in and defined by a variety of often interrelated systems, social, linguistic, economical, situational, etc. Artists worked with conceptual possibilities of the systems in order to explore new ways of working with materialities, which were not so much related to the object of art as to the flux of post-modern culture and all its contradictions and complexities. 120


Since Marx’s Grundrisse the concept of general intellect has become central to debates around knowledge-based economy, information society, cognitive capitalism, immaterial labor, collective intelligence, creative class, cognitariat, knowledge sharing, postfordism and more.

Rather than general intellect we should talk of general intellects. There are multiple forms of collective intelligence and there is also a dark side of immaterial labor. Some kinds of collective intelligence can become totalitarian systems such as the military-managerial ideology of the neocons or Microsoft empire. 268


Media Art Histories by Oliver Grau

Names
Linda Dalrympe Henderdon “Writing Modern Art and Science”
Ken Knowleton
Sonia Sheridan
Michael Rees
Roy Ascott
Julia Scher
Rtmark
Le Corbusier
Keith Piper
Toshio Iwai

Even prior to the advent of computer networking and satellite communications, artists produced work in which the exchange, transfer, and collaborative creation of information often involve remote participants. 62

Art has always been implicitly interactive in the sense that it demands some manner of perceptual and cognitive interaction on the part of the viewer. Artists working with electronic media increasingly came to think of themselves as providing open-ended contexts that offered audiences infinite possibilities for the production of unpredictable meanings through creative exchanges. 62

In books we find imaginary machines. Some can talk and some can write, yet they cannot take that one more decisive step: their language remains descriptive, it is not operational. For a computer, however, the program language is part of its function; it no longer describes, it acts. This switch from description to command can never be reached through literature alone. In the fields of art and literature, language cannot be made operational; this is first possible only when they join forces with the technology of the apparatus. 111

The viewer may be looking at a database-driven project that continuously configures itself over time of a visualization that is driven by real-time data flow from the internet and will never repeat itself. At any given point in time, the viewer might only see one possible configuration of an essentially nonlinear project. New media works tend to be more context-dependent than many other art forms since they require information about which set of data is being shown, where it is coming from, and according to which logic it is configured. It is essential to a successful presentation of new media art to provide viewers with a sufficient context for understanding the basics of a process-oriented system, even if their viewing time is very short. 253

The potentially interactive and participatory nature of new media projects—which allow people to navigate, assemble, or contribute to an artwork in a way that goes beyond the interactive, mental event of experiencing it—runs counter to the basic rule of museums: “Please do not touch the art.” 254

A broader art audience may still place more trust in the selection undertaken by a prestigious museum, but in the online environment, the only signifier of validation may be the brand recognition carried by the museum’s name. 265
Walker Art Center’s Gallery 9
SF MOMA’s e-space
Whitney Museum’s artport


Illness as Metaphor by Susan Sontag
Illness is the night side of life, a more onerous citizenship. Everyone who is born holds dual citizenship, in the kingdom of the well and in the kingdom of the sick. Although we all prefer to use only the good passport, sooner or later each of us is obliged, at least for a spell, to identify ourselves as citizens of the other place. 3

Any disease that is treated as a mystery and acutely enough feared will be felt to be morally, if not literally, contagious. 6

Cancer, as a disease that can strike anywhere, is a disease of the body. Far from revealing anything spiritual, it reveals that the body is, all too woefully, just the body. 18

It was with TB that the idea of individual illness was articulated, along with the idea that people are made more conscious as they confront their deaths. Sickness was a way of making people interesting which is how romantic was originally defined. 30

The disease the individualizes that sets a person in relief against the environment is tuberculosis. In contrast to the great epidemic disease as of the past, which strike each person as a member of been afflicted community, TB was understood as a disease that isolates one from the community. However steep its incidents in a population, TB like cancer today always seemed to be a mysterious disease of individuals a deadly arrow that could strike anyone, that singled out its victims one by one. 37-38


There is a belief that cancer is a disease that strikes each person punitively as an individual. No one asks why me who gets Cholera or typhus. But “why me” meaning “it’s not fair” is the question of many who learned they have cancer. 38

The diseases around which modern fantasies have gathered are viewed as forms of self-judgment, of self-betrayal. One’s mind betrays one’s body. 40

Disease is the will speaking through the body, a language for dramatizing the mental: a form of self-expression. 44

Theories that diseases are caused by mental states and can be cured by will power are always an index of how much is not understood about the physical terrain of the disease. 55

Patients who are instructed that they have, unwittingly, caused their disease are also being made to feel that they have deserved it. 57

Nothing is more punitive than to give a disease a meaning—that meaning being invariably a moralistic one. 58

Trying to comprehend “radical” or “absolute” evil, we search for adequate metaphors. But the modern disease metaphors are all cheapshots. The people who have the real disease are also hardly helped by hearing the disease’s name constantly being dropped as the epitome of evil. 85

The interest of the metaphor is precisely that it refers to a disease so overlaid with mystification 87


Making Art of Databases by Lev Manovich, et. al.

Whether we store information for purposes of control or for the production of knowledge, it doesn’t really come to life until it is intelligently linked and combined. If sociologists view information primarily as the raw material for the rational process of knowledge production, the irrational side effects of the information society are at least equally fascinating— information that gets out of control and the misinformation it produces. 3 Alex Adriaansens

Symbolist models seem the most appropriate to preserve the integrity of a specific domain. The symbolic aspects of reliability and domain-specific annotations provide the tools for a useful expert archive. The database ontology most used for this type of application is built as fixed classification system. To ensure reliability, symbolic models demand authorized maintenance by a specialist, and allow little or no user participation, let alone co-creation of content by unknown users, for this would disturb the reliability and intervene with the expert protocol. 10 Anne Nitgen


All and Nothing, A Digital Apocalypse by Martin Burckhardt and Dirk Hofer

The Boolean digits 1 and 0 do not designate a quantity; instead, they mark presence and absence. Thus 1 stands for the universe, 0 stands for nothingness. Nevertheless, the terms are not governed by a mutually exclusive relationship. Their relationship is complementary: they follow the same logic. Just as 1 times 1 always yields 1, and 0 times 0 always produces 0, x times x always equals x in the Boolean world. For the same reason, All and Nothing meet up in the formula x = x^n. Because x can stand for anything and everything—indeed, for the universe and its entirety—it is no exaggeration to speak of a digital world formula in this context. 2

The British mathematician’s impulse to make 0 and 1 the signifiers for binary logic involved removing the representative from mathematics. This allows for one to jump from one number system to another. Boole’s binary logic detaches itself from mathematics; it abandons the material quality of what it describes. 5

Description and inscription became one and the same: programming.  Our world has turned into a gigantic word-processor, orbited by satellites and shrouded by an ether of information. As such, the Boolean removal of the representative heralded the end of representation as an epistemological practice. Programming means no longer being content to describe the world—instead one sets out to change it. 9

Every piece of information is a publication. It doesn’t really matter what public it addresses. The potential audience for the digital sphere, the Internet, is always the whole world. The number of copies of a publication corresponds precisely to the number of interested parties; it is measured in hits or clicks. Information that spreads without any possible restraint takes the form of a hydra. 13

The digital simulacra ensuring human survival in multi-media form produce an uncanny effect. All of a sudden, the present is teeming with the dead—their voices, actions, and dreams. Like Snow White, they all lie in a glass coffin, just waiting to be kissed back to life. One click is all it takes. It is no coincidence that popular culture inasmuch as it is written and recorded, does not focus on the unfamiliar so much as it reanimates the past. 16

Electricity makes acting a matter of telematic manipulation; it empties out human agency and gives rise to collective irresponsibility. The formula x= x^n means that the act of pushing a button—even if it still represents an action in literal terms—is detached from the agent and represents the taking of an abstract measure. To act without being the one who performed the action: this is the defining feature of modern morality. 25

The singular body has disappeared inasmuch as it now serves a social body that, ultimately, animates the machine. That—and not for the sake of the individual’s life—is the reason to keep it healthy. Ground down to pixels, it becomes part of the social body, the intellectual property of the machine. 29

The data world is always breaking down the body into smaller and smaller units, which are then aggregated into patterns. As such, it and its behavior can easily be recombined into an array of new arrangements. And so, in the machine, one can assemble a dream body. The body becomes a recombinable plaything and, with that, a design problem. Now identity is not a matter of destiny, but a question of features, choices, and options. 30

The code decomposes the world into discrete building blocks, places them in sequence along an arrow of time, and makes them readable, interpretable, and ultimately, programmable. 33

Attention economy… When so-and-so many people click on a YouTube video, it receives a value. If, formerly, value was an act of purchase, not is is a “hit” or click—some trace signal that users have devoted attention to this particular object, site, or event. Only because the consumer’s time is limited can the attention economy command any credibility. The shift from a standard based on natural scarcity to one based on finite perception signals a far-reaching change. 38

Once a task has been programmed, it lands in the museum of labor—and is devalued accordingly. What Joseph Schumpeter called creative destruction boils down to a split. In the realm of the formula, we are faced with asymmetry: the human being, in keeping with human nature, can think the equation, but he or she cannot comply with it physically. Though the spirit is willing, the flesh is weak. 45

Indeed, how the website appears often does not even correspond to a unified space; instead, it represents the simultaneity of different spatial points. And with that, the browser cashes a check that no physical body could ever pay: being at different locations on the globe at one and the same time. 48

Museums present collections that stand as the sediments of cultural achievement. By this means, society can retroactively call back, into the present, what it has done and whit has been: it can canonize its accomplishments. But in the digital realm, the nature of the archive changes. Systems of preservation and presentation that are organized according to symbolic order lose spatial and temporal points of reference. A digital archive is not a location one visits; instead it consists of scattered displays for retrieving material as a simulacrum. 57

Thus the problem of data security occupies the abyss between the ether, where my data body resides, and the physical world of objects. This gulf, which also represents a contradiction, enables legal entities to gain power over my data body: a form of symbolic arrest or habeas corpus. As soon as I take advantage of the conveniences, I hand my data body over and make i public domain. 65

Such estrangement has fatal consequences. Instead of acknowledging how digitization shapes and forms our circumstances, we complain and lament, but only the symptoms receive attention. Turning a blind eye affords a certain relief: the new is simply incorporated into our habitual patterns of thought in order to patch up a crumbling worldview. 91

Metamagical Themas: Questioning for the Essence of Mind and Pattern by Douglas Hofstadter
Parquet Deformations
Metafont

On number numbness


Introduction to Archival Organization and Description by Michael Fox and Peter L Wilkerson

Archives as evidence: they are evidence of what has transpired
Archives as information:they may also be used for other purposes unrelated to the circumstances of their original creation. 5

Content analysis: whether this information is significant enough to include in the summary description. 16


The Big Archive: Art from bureaucracy by Sven Spieker
Using the term from cybernetics we could describe Kabakov’s overlaying of trash with a grid as a form of feedback. Feedback describes a self-regulating system’s ability to control its output through internal control mechanisms without interrupting its activity. Xi

Archives do not record experience so much as its absence; they mark a point where an experience is missing from its proper place, and what is returned to us in an archive may well be something we never possessed in the first place. 3

Yosef Hayim Yerushalmi “Memory is not an archive, nor is an archive in memory bank. The documents in an archive are not part of memory; if they were, we should have no need to retrieve them; once retrieved, they are often at odds with memory.” 4

Control revolution in the period 1880 through 1930, reaction to the loss of economic and political control at local levels of society during the industrial revolution. 5

Walter Benjamin‘s definition of authentic memories: for authentic memories it is far less important that the investigator report on them then that he mark, quite precisely, the site where he gained possession of him. 19

If we cannot know what will or will not be useful in the future, then archives have to preserve all the paperwork. 22

Duchamp’s planned snapshots = readymades = archives = information

The teeth of a comb or not really very important element in life. In other words, when you look at a comb, you just look at your hair, you use it or you don’t, but the number of teeth of the comb is really unimportant. I was struck by the unimportantance and I made it important to me. - Duchamp 69

El LIssitzsky Demonstration Rooms

Foucault on the medical gaze and writing: Before it became a corpus of knowledge, medicine was a universal relationship of mankind with itself. And the decline began when writing and secrecy were introduced… and the dissociation of the immediate relationship, which had neither obstacles nor limits between gaze and speech. 114

Rodchenko’s papka for Lenin

Frequently resembling databases more than archives based in the principle of provenance, these archives focus on the signifier over its mythical or monumental signified, and they suggest that the relationship between signifiers in an archive is not determined by chronology alone. 136

The crisis of the photo archive to which Feldmann points concerns more than anything the archive’s claim that all of its data are linked internally. Such linkages, Feldmann seems to argue, are frequently the result of a cognitive operation, a process of projection rather than an objectifiable fact. 139

Photographs inventory reality by picking up literally everything before their mechanical eye; yet these attributes can be integrated only as long as the viewer’s memory can still imbue them with truth: “If one can no longer encounter the grandmother in the photograph, the image taken from the family album necessarily disintegrates into its particulars” 144


Generally speaking, our interaction with the archive is not supposed to leave any traces; protected by gloves when we handle archival records and shielded from adding to or subtracting from what is already there. 175
